---
layout: post
title: "First Time Setup Activities"
date: 2025-09-09
categories: [Foundation, C-github_pages]
---

## First Time Setup Activities
A guide for fun activities to help you understand the basics. We'll go over Jupyter Notebooks, changing the theme of a website, and creating moving objects on backgrounds.

## Jupyter Notebook Activity
For this activity, you will learn how to insert code into a Jupyter Notebook. You will do this by learning how to run a "jokes machine". A "jokes machine" basically means being able to run a series of code that will output a variety of jokes.


**First,** start by opening a new Jupyter Notebook in your pages repo:
opening a fresh window in VS code, go to the menu (Cmd+Shift+P) and type: `Create: New Jupyter Notebook`. Click the first result. If you're on the "Welcome

With that open, rename the file to something along the lines of `jokes.ipynb`. You may be able to do this 

Now, you should see a black box where you can input code. Copy and paste this:

```bash
%%javascript

var compsci_joke_list = [
    { joke: "Why do programmers prefer dark mode? Because light attracts bugs.", complexity: "1" },
    { joke: "Why do Java developers wear glasses? Because they don't see sharp.", complexity: "2" },
    { joke: "How many programmers does it take to change a light bulb? None, that's a hardware problem.", complexity: "1" },
    { joke: "Why do Python programmers prefer snake_case? Because they can't C.", complexity: "2" },
    { joke: "Why was the JavaScript developer sad? Because he didn't know how to 'null' his feelings.", complexity: "3" },
    { joke: "Why do programmers always mix up Christmas and Halloween? Because Oct 31 == Dec 25.", complexity: "3" },
    { joke: "Why did the programmer quit his job? Because he didn't get arrays.", complexity: "O(n)" },
    { joke: "Why do Linux programmers prefer using the terminal? Because they don't like Windows.", complexity: "1" },
];
var randomIndex = Math.floor(Math.random() * compsci_joke_list.length);
var selectedJoke = compsci_joke_list[randomIndex];
console.log("Joke #" + (randomIndex + 1) + ": " + selectedJoke.joke + " (Complexity: " + selectedJoke.complexity + ")");
```
Now, to see the jokes run, follow these steps:
1. Help->Toggle Developer Tools
2. At the very top, click the 🚫 icon (clear console)
3. Press the play button (triangle) on the left of the box with the code (when you click this, it should ask you whether or not to click an `Existing Jupyter Server` or a `Python Env`. Click on `Python Env`.)
4. You should get a random joke output in the Console!

---


## Theme Change Activity
In this activity you will learn how to use the make command, which will then allow you to change the theme of a website.

**First,** open your VS code. In your terminal:
``` 
cd pages
make serve-so-simple
```
**One at a time ^**

The `cd pages` will only work if you're not already in your pages repository. If you are in your pages repo, skip the first like. 

You can also follow these steps instead:
In teriminal not in VS code:
``` 
 cd opencs/pages
 source venv/bin/activate
 code .
 ```
 **One at a time ^**
 
 Once in pages repo, open the VS code terminal and type:
 ```
 make serve-so-simple
 ```
 After running that, you should get a huge chunk of code, and at the end a server address. Copy and paste that into your browser and there you go! Theme changed.
--
## Flying UFO Activity
In this activity, learn how to create a website with moving objects and a working background. This activity must be done with at least two weeks of your compsci class done **after** tool setup and troubleshooting has been completed.

During your computer science class, you will have to move around many different files, however the most important for this activity is having the `platformer` file from your pages repo to your student repo. Put this under images.

**First** (after moving platformer), open these two files:

`flying-ufo.png` (under images-->platformer-->sprites)


`alien_planet1.jpg` (under images-->platformer-->backgrounds)

With these files open, open your terminal and run:
```
make
```
You will be met with a server address at the end. Type this into your browser and make sure to **type `background` at the end of the server address when in browser.**

---

These are all of the beginner setup activities to help you get familiar with the tools, commands, and formating of future assignments. This guide will hopefully pave the path to bigger and better creations during your time in computer science.